---
layout: bare
title: Locus of Linguistic Variation Symposium at LSA 2014
permalink: /locus/
date: 2014-01-03
show: true
summary: >
  A summary of the "Locus of Linguistic Variation" session I
  co-organized at LSA 2014.

---

<div class="titleblock">
  <div class="">
    <h1>The Locus of Linguistic Variation</h1>
    <h2><a href="http://www.linguisticsociety.org/session/symposium-locus-linguistic-variation">LSA 2014 Symposium</a><br />January 3rd 2014, 9:00-10:30AM, Grand Ballroom F</h2>
  </div>
</div>

<h3>Organizers:</h3>
<p><a href="http://lignos.org">Constantine Lignos</a> (Children&#39;s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania)<br>
<a href="http://personalpages.manchester.ac.uk/staff/laurel.mackenzie/">Laurel MacKenzie</a> (University of Manchester)<br>
<a href="http://www.meredithtamminga.com/">Meredith Tamminga</a> (University of Pennsylvania)</p>

<h3>Schedule:</h3>
<table class="topalign">
  <tr>
    <td class="nowrap">9:00-9:30</td>
    <td><a href="http://www.meredithtamminga.com/">Meredith Tamminga</a> (University of Pennsylvania), <a href="http://personalpages.manchester.ac.uk/staff/laurel.mackenzie/">Laurel MacKenzie</a> (University of Manchester): <a href="#Tamminga-MacKenzie"><em>Elaborating
      extragrammatical effects on variation</em></a> (<a href="/talks/locus/Tamminga-MacKenzie_Elaborating-Extragrammatical-Effects_LSA2014_slides.pdf">slides</a>) (<a href="/talks/locus/Tamminga-MacKenzie_Elaborating-Extragrammatical-Effects_LSA2014_abs.pdf">abstract</a>)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="nowrap">9:30-10:00</td>
    <td><a href="http://www.jennifernycz.com/">Jennifer Nycz</a> (Georgetown University): <a href="#Nycz"><em>Variable rules or
    variable inputs? Process-based and representational approaches to
    variability</em></a> (<a href="/talks/locus/Nycz_Variable-rules-or-variable-inputs_LSA2014_slides.pdf">slides</a>)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="nowrap">10:00-10:30</td>
    <td><a href="http://www-personal.umich.edu/~coetzee/">Andries W. Coetzee</a> (University of Michigan): <a href="#Coetzee"><em>A grammar-delimited
variable space</em></a> (<a href="/talks/locus/Coetzee_Grammar-Defined-Variable-Space_LSA2014_slides.pdf">slides</a>)</td>
  </tr>
</table>

---

### Overview

Early accounts of generative grammar (e.g., Chomsky 1965) postulated a
firm separation between the variability present in language production
and the grammar itself. Performance was regarded as extraneous, simply
a frosted window obscuring the view of the key object of study,
competence. Around the same time, early researchers in
sociolinguistics moved to explicitly integrate variation into the
grammar, developing such concepts as inherent variability (Weinreich,
Labov, and Herzog 1968) and variable rules (Cedergren and Sankoff
1974). Decades of study and three major "waves" of sociolinguistic
scholarship later, the study of variation has grown from a
marginalized topic to a substantial linguistic discipline. This
symposium revisits these two perspectives and examines whether a
middle ground between them can and should be reached, addressing the
relationship between variation and the grammar and discussing the
extent to which the two may be dissociated.

The symposium consists of three presentations that provide novel
quantitative data on a total of four linguistic variables. In each
case, the authors argue for an addition to the typology outlined
above: an approach under which grammar and variation are linked but
still show some amount of modular separation. Specifically, the
session participants argue that while variation is not exclusively the
purview of grammar, variation and grammar are not completely separate,
either. Instead, some effects on variation support the inherent
variability of Weinreich et al., while others are best localized
outside of the grammar. Between the three presentations, a catalog
emerges of these grammar-external effects, which are shown to comprise
particular conditioning factors as well as amplification in magnitude
of factors that have a grammar-internal source. Each presentation also
provides a different perspective on how the linguistic system may be
structured in order to account for the demonstrated extragrammatical
effects.

The general consensus emerging from these three presentations is that
a well-developed understanding of how extragrammatical factors impinge
on variation is necessary in order to accurately recognize the
grammar-internal origins and conditioning of variation. Researchers
who seek to construct grammatical models that capture the appropriate
amount of grammar-internal variability must first factor out the
extragrammatical effects that this session documents. In addition to
the theoretical issues explored, this symposium also provides a
demonstration of how modern advances in quantitative methods can
enable the exploration of previously intractable theoretical
questions. Through careful use of a combination of theoretical and
quantitative approaches, the speakers in this symposium demonstrate
the unity of linguistic methods and the importance of using all
available empirical techniques to reach an understanding of the
structure of language in the mind.

---

### <a name="Tamminga-MacKenzie">Elaborating extragrammatical effects on variation</a> (<a href="/talks/locus/Tamminga-MacKenzie_Elaborating-Extragrammatical-Effects_LSA2014_slides.pdf">slides</a>) (<a href="/talks/locus/Tamminga-MacKenzie_Elaborating-Extragrammatical-Effects_LSA2014_abs.pdf">abstract</a>)

Meredith Tamminga (University of Pennsylvania)  
Laurel MacKenzie (University of Manchester)


This paper takes as a starting point the concept of inherent
variability. While we agree with previous researchers that some
instances of linguistic variation motivate a unified treatment of
variable and categorical phenomena within the grammar, we argue that
some cases of variation are better localized to a distinct component
of use.  As evidence, we cite the effects of persistence on ING and
subject length on auxiliary contraction. These effects differ from
other factors that condition these variables (e.g., phonological
context, subject type), in that they are not found to condition
invariant alternations. This supports a model that differentiates
grammar and use, with both being probabilistic, and the persistence
and subject length effects localized to the use component.  We then
elaborate this basic model, suggesting that extragrammatical factors
are of two types: style and processing. We identify predictions for
the relationship and interactions between grammar and each
extragrammatical component.

---

### <a name="Nycz">Variable rules or variable inputs? Process-based and representational approaches to variability</a> (<a href="/talks/locus/Nycz_Variable-rules-or-variable-inputs_LSA2014_slides.pdf">slides</a>)

Jennifer Nycz (Georgetown University)


Variationists argue that variable phenomena reflect aspects of
linguistic competence and should be accounted for within linguistic
theory. Many attempts to do so have located variation in the process
side of theory, first via the the variable rule and later via the
variable ranking of OT constraints, yet there has been some shift
towards representational accounts of variation based in Exemplar
Theory. So, is variation in the grammar, in representations, or
somewhere else? Are different phenomena more easily accounted for in
one component or another, or can some be located in multiple places?
I address these questions through the examination of variable Canadian
Raising in the speech of Canadians who have moved to the U.S.  I argue
that the socioindexical aspects of this variation require reference to
changing and variable representations while linguistic conditioning
factors are best located in the grammatical component, and outline a
complementary-systems model of this variation.

---

### <a name="Coetzee">A grammar-delimited variable space</a> (<a href="/talks/locus/Coetzee_Grammar-Defined-Variable-Space_LSA2014_slides.pdf">slides</a>)

Andries W. Coetzee (University of Michigan)

Existing approaches to phonological variation differ in the role that
they ascribe to grammar. Some assume no role for grammar, considering
variation as the result of non-grammatical factors impacting the
categorical output of phonological grammar. Others assume that grammar
and non-grammatical factors contribute equally to variation. Yet
others attempt to account for all aspects of variation with grammar
alone, allowing no room for non-grammatical factors. In this talk, I
will develop a fourth possible model with the following features: (i)
Grammar itself is variable and hence contributes to variation. (ii)
Non-grammatical factors also contribute. (iii) But the model is
grammar dominantâ€“grammar defines the space of possible variation and
non-grammatical factors can only influence how variation is realized
within this grammar-delimited variable space. The model will be
implemented in Harmonic Grammar, and will be applied to variable
t/d-deletion and variable cross-word nasal place assimilation in
English.
